---
order: 2
parent: School years
title: Early Years Foundation Stage
---

import EarlyYearsFoundationSVG from "./svg/early-years-foundaion-stage.svg";

<a className="external-link"
href="https://www.gov.uk/early-years-foundation-stage">The Early Years
Foundation Stage</a> sets the standards for the learning, development and care
of children from birth to five years of age. All schools and Ofsted registered
childcare providers are expected to follow these standards. It therefore
provides a crucial indicator of a child’s development and ‘school readiness’.
Currently, there is a gap of 17 percentage points between children entitled to
Free School Meals and all other children. With 57% of children entitled to Free
School Meals achieving a good level of development in comparison to 74% of all
other children.

<div>
  <EarlyYearsFoundationSVG /> 
  <div style={{ "text-align": "center" }}>
    **With
    <span style={{ color: "var(--yellow)" }}>
      57% of children entitled to Free School Meals
    </span>{" "}
    achieving a good level of development in comparison to{" "}
    <span style={{ color: "var(--cobalt)" }}>74% of all other children.</span>
    **<FootnoteLink text="1"/>
  </div>
</div>

<div> 
  
  A large proportion of children from lower-socio-economic backgrounds are
  behind their peers from higher socio-economic backgrounds at the very start of
  their school careers. Those who fall behind by the age of five have lower
  average educational attainment in the future, with lower attainment throughout
  primary school predicting lower achievement at GCSE level.<FootnoteLink
  text="2"/>

  As outlined in the sections that follow, family circumstances, including
  parental actions such as supported reading, play a part in this. But there are
  also substantial structural issues too, such as access to high quality and
  affordable child care. There are significant regional differences in five year
  olds achieving a good level of development. Pupils from lower socio-economic
  backgrounds in the South and London are more likely to achieve a good level of
  development than pupils in the North or Midlands.<FootnoteLink text="3"/>

</div>

Nurseries in England’s most deprived communities are facing closure because of a
shortfall in government funding. The government provides nurseries with £4.98
per hour for places to local authorities. This is, however, is insufficient to
meet the costs of provision. Hence, providers are increasing fees for parents to
be able to pay for food, staff and resources, making childcare prohibitive for
many from lower socio-economic backgrounds. Some commentators perceive there to
be a real danger of childcare becoming the preserve of the wealthy under these
funding conditions.<FootnoteLink text="4"/> There is doubtless an uneven distribution of provision
across the country, and this exacerbates existing inequalities related to family
circumstances.

<Footnotes>
  1. https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/early-years-foundation-stage-profile-results-2018-to-2019
  2. Alissa Goodman and Paul Gregg. (2010){" "}
  <a href="https://www.jrf.org.uk/report/poorer-children%E2%80%99s-educational-attainment-how-important-are-attitudes-and-behaviour">
    Poorer children’s educational attainment: how important are attitudes and behaviour?
  </a> Joseph Rowntree Foundation. 
  3. Department for Education and NatCen. (2018){" "}
  <a href="https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/732268/Regional_Early_Years_Attainment_Gap.pdf">
    Regional differences in attainment in the early years.
  </a>
  4. Hannah Richardson. (2019) <a href="https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-48804395">Childcare might become ‘available only in rich areas’</a>.
  BBC News.
</Footnotes>
