---
order: 3
parent: School years
title: Family circumstances
footnotes:
  [
    {
      id: "footnote-1",
      text: "Lorraine Dearden et al. (2011). The socio-economic gradient in early child outcomes: evidence from the millennium cohort study. Longitudinal and life course studies. Volume 2: Issue 1.",
    },
    {
      id: "footnote-2",
      text: "NatCen Social Research. Can out of school activities close the education gap?; Donnelly (2019) An Unequal Playing Field",
    },
    {
      id: "footnote-3",
      text: "Michael Donnelly et al. (2019) An Unequal Playing Field: Extra-Curricular Activities, Soft Skills and Social Mobility. Social Mobility Commission.",
    },
    {
      id: "footnote-4",
      text: "William Jeynes. (2010) Parental Involvement and Academic Success. Taylor & Francis.",
    },
    {
      id: "footnote-5",
      text: "Desforges, C. and Abouchaar, A. (2003). The impact of parental involvement, parental support and family education on pupil achievement and adjustment: A literature review. London: Department for Education and Skills.",
    },
  ]
---

import ResearchImage from "../../components/research/research-image";

Family circumstances, including income and parental education, influence a
child’s educational development in various ways.<FootnoteLink 
linkId="footnote-1">1</FootnoteLink> The pressures of financial deprivation
often impact on the priority given to education and constrain the type of
support and resources that can be provided to supplement in-school learning —
including, reading with children, helping with homework, visiting museums and
theatres, and paying for tuition. This sort of support and home culture is
sometimes referred to as ‘cultural capital’. The home context has a strong
influence on a pupil’s experience of school.

<ResearchImage imageName="family-circumstances.jpg" />

<div>
**A) Extra-curricular activities**

There is evidence of a relationship between out-of-school activities and
improved pupil outcomes.<FootnoteLink
linkId="footnote-2">2</FootnoteLink>Studies have shown an association between
participation in organised physical activities and improved attainment and
socio-emotional outcomes by the age of eleven. More generally, extracurricular
activities are recognised as important in developing soft skills that are
correlated with upward social mobility. In part, this is because soft skills are
valued by employers and play a role in differentiating candidates in the
recruitment process, but also because participation in extra-curricular
activities is linked to increased educational ambition.

Pupils from higher socio-economic backgrounds are significantly more likely to
participate in out-of-school activities and benefit from attaining capabilities
and experiences beyond the curriculum (such as, team-working, goal-setting, and
social confidence).<FootnoteLink linkId="footnote-3">3</FootnoteLink>

</div>

Children from lower socio-economic backgrounds were especially excluded from
music classes and sporting activities. A key factor determining this
socio-economic gap in participation is the upfront cost: for many families, the
cost of extra-curricular activities is prohibitive and not deemed essential in
the current financial climate. While more research is needed to better
understand the link between extra-curricular activities and attainment, the
evidence base is strong and compelling on their importance in developing
confidence and social skills that are valued by employers.

<ResearchQuote
  source="- A large-scale study commissioned by the Social Mobility Commission"
>
  It is not so much a question of choosing not to participate, but rather a
  question of an unequal playing field in the opportunities and chance of
  participating. The overlapping effects of social class, school attended,
  gender, ethnicity and geography are key drivers shaping these unequal
  opportunities.
</ResearchQuote>

<div>
**B) Parental involvement in their child’s learning**

Parental engagement in their child’s learning has a positive effect on their
school performance at both primary and secondary school level.<FootnoteLink
linkId="footnote-4">4</FootnoteLink>It contributes to greater enjoyment of
school, increased attendance, and improved well-being － all factors that
contribute to raised attainment.<FootnoteLink
linkId="footnote-5">5</FootnoteLink>In particular, parental engagement has a
striking effect on reading in the early years and throughout primary school.
Parental actions such as reading to a child, or being read to, can have a strong
impact on a child’s reading progress and life-long enjoyment of reading. Parents
who make time for reading and promote it at home — through library visits and
reading routines — are more likely to inspire motivation to read.
Correspondingly, reading ability is a strong predictor of attainment.

</div>

Strong early language skills give children the essential foundation for learning
in primary school. As a child grows, being able to read confidently and
independently is key to their progress in their studies. But there is evidence
that one in five 11-year olds cannot read well, rising to one in three amongst
children from lower socio-economic backgrounds. This, typically, has a negative
impact on their transition into secondary school and hinders their capacity to
make ‘good’ progress. According to research by the Literacy Trust, amongst
children from lower socio-economic backgrounds, only one in eight owned a book.
And, children who do not own their own books are four times more likely to read
below their expected reading age.

<ResearchImage imageName="family-circumstances-2.jpg" />

<div>
  There are gaps in parental engagement by socio-economic background and level
  of parental education. For instance, families where both parents are highly
  educated spend on average 110 minutes per day on educational activities with
  their young children compared to 71 minutes amongst parents with lower levels
  of education. This gap has grown over time and is now wider than it was in
  1970. Consequently, children from higher socio-economic backgrounds not only
  benefit from greater parental financial resources, enabling access to
  educational resources and participation in extra-curricular activities, but
  they also receive an additional advantage of having parents who know how to
  navigate the world of education.

Parental investment in education has such a strong effect on school
performance that it can cancel out the negative effects of financial hardship.
In particular, the role of fathers in their child’s education has been shown
to play a strong part in reducing the damaging effects of economic factors.
Increased parental engagement is therefore critically important to reduce the
attainment gap alongside school provision.

</div>

Social class has an effect on parents’ attitudes towards education and their
ability to support their children through their schooling. Parents from higher
socio-economic backgrounds use their social, cultural and financial resources to
position their children at an advantage in the educational system. This can take
a number of forms, from relocating to access high status state schools, to
providing private tuition, to intervening in school life to ensure the emotional
and academic well-being of their children.

The Sutton Trust has undertaken surveys amongst parents to understand their
involvement in their children’s education by social class. They reveal that
parents from the highest social groups are far more likely to deploy resource
intensive strategies to gain an advantage over others in the competitive
schooling system. The most common tactic reported by parents was moving to an
area perceived as having good schools. But as moving house is financially risky
and costly, it is a strategy used predominantly by parents in the highest social
group (14%) in comparison to those from the lowest (4%).This pattern is repeated
for moving house to live in a specific school catchment area, with 10% of
parents in the highest social group reporting they used this strategy, to just
1% in the lowest social group.

Private tuition is widely regarded as an aid to securing places in selective
schools and to preparing children for exams. Yet it is children from the highest
socio-economic groups who are most likely to receive private tuition. According
to the most recent Parent Power survey, 22% of parents from higher
socio-economic backgrounds said that their child had received private tuition in
the last year, compared to just 5% of parents from lower socio-economic
backgrounds.

<ResearchImage imageName="family-circumstances-3.jpg" />

Whilst some argue that grammar schools are vehicles for social mobility, the
practice of middle class parents utilising strategies, such as private tuition,
to secure an advantage in the system means that access is not simply a feature
of ‘merit’ or prior attainment, but a product of socio-economic factors.

Once a school place has been secured, there is a strong relationship between
social class and the level and type of engagement parents have with their
children’s school. Parents from higher socio-economic backgrounds are more
likely to get involved with their children’s school, attend parents meetings,
and intervene to improve educational outcomes. Notably, even when middle class
parents refuse to participate in the competition for educational success and
choose to send their children to their local urban comprehensive school, they go
on to intervene in school in ways to secure advantages. In the process, their
children learned how to ‘play the game’, understanding how the system works and
how to make it work for them.

<ResearchQuote
  source="Gill Crozier et al. (2011) Making it work for their
  children: white middle-class parents and working-class schools. International
  Studies in Sociology of Education. Volume 21: Issue 3"
>
  The parents guided their children and helped them navigate their way through
  the school; they helped them to get the most out of the school and access the
  relatively limited ‘best’ resources. Where this didn’t appear to be happening,
  they stepped in to remediate the situation.
</ResearchQuote>
