---
order: 4
parent: Early years
title: Early years provision
---

import ResearchImage from "../../components/research/research-image";
import EarlyYearsProvisionSVG from "./svg/early-years-graph-2.svg";

Although the early years are often about the relationship between parent and
child — and the environmental context in which that relationship is built — that
does not reduce the importance of Early Years provision in supporting a child’s
early development. Moreover, recognising the uneven distribution and take-up of
Early Years provision is an important way in which unequal outcomes can be felt
even in the earliest years.

<ResearchImage imageName="early-years-provision.jpg" />

Early Years educational provision has been shown to have a long-term impact on
academic attainment and behavioural development. Research has found that for
students with low qualified parents, attending a high quality pre-school can
make the difference of half a grade at GCSE level English, and a third of a
grade at GCSE level mathematics.<FootnoteLink text="1"/> The same report
highlighted that those who attended pre-school were more likely to go into
further education, and more likely to take four or more A-Levels. Beyond
academic attainment, research has also suggested that early pre-school
interventions be helpful in breaking links between parental behaviours and child
outcomes — particularly in relation to crime and teen parenting.<FootnoteLink
text="2"/> 

A recent report looking at Early Childhood Education and Care (ECEC) found
improved outcomes for the 40% of children from lower socio-economic backgrounds
using 10 hours a week of formal ECEC by the age of two (followed by 20 or more
hours a week between the ages of two and four). It increased their chances of
achieving a good level of progress during the Reception year and improved their
verbal ability in Year One.<FootnoteLink text="3"/> This supports other research
indicating that children from lower socio-economic backgrounds are able to make
more progress in terms of cognitive development than their peers in early
education settings.<FootnoteLink text="4"/> These findings suggest that early
intervention can make an important contribution to lowering the gap in
attainment between children from different socio-economic backgrounds. 

<div>
	**Students with low qualified parents attending a high quality pre-school can
	make the difference of:**<FootnoteLink text="5"/> 
	<EarlyYearsProvisionSVG />
</div>

However a key caveat here — and a finding that is supported across the
literature — is that the quality of the intervention is critical. In a report
looking at good practice in early education there were three key dimensions
highlighted that can make a difference: tailoring practice to the needs of
children; skilled and experienced staff; and an open and reflective
culture.<FootnoteLink text="6"/> To close the attainment gap it is important
that children are able to access good quality early education.<FootnoteLink
text="7"/> 

Access to high quality early education is uneven. Research by the Nuffield
Foundation found that Early Years care was of the lowest quality among private,
voluntary and independent providers operating in the most financially deprived
areas.<FootnoteLink text="8"/> They concluded that more needed to be done to
ensure that children experiencing financial hardship have access to the same
chances as their peers from higher social groups. The silver-lining in their
report is that state provided early education was able to offer services in
deprived areas that were of a similar quality to those in more affluent
areas.<FootnoteLink text="9"/>

High quality educational provision has a critical role to play in reducing
attainment gaps between children growing up in lower socio-economic households
compared to their peers in higher socio-economic groups. The challenge is to
make sure this provisioning is both accessible and of a high quality, regardless
of geographic location. As the OECD summarises, countries which make the effort
to provide affordable, high-quality early education and care are often those
that have the best outcomes in terms of social mobility and educational
attainment in later life.<FootnoteLink text="10"/> From an employer’s
perspective, the OECD research also finds that in countries like Denmark, where
early years provision is universal and affordable, mothers are much more likely
to return to work after pregnancy.

In the UK, the Sure Start scheme was introduced in 1990 to improve the health
and early educational development of children living in financially deprived
communities. This initiative was driven by research indicating that early
interventions are important to narrow the educational gap between children from
different socio-economic backgrounds. 

Increased financial support for pre-school children can raise earlier
educational attainment and contribute to social mobility. There is also evidence
to indicate that the widespread availability of Sure Start centres delivered
major health benefits for children in the most deprived areas of
England.<FootnoteLink text="11"/> Over the last 10 years, however, the Sure
Start budget has been reduced by two-thirds and its capacity to reduce health
and educational inequalities is now greatly limited.

<Footnotes>
	1. Brenda Taggart et al. (2015) <a href="https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/455670/RB455_Effective_pre-school_primary_and_secondary_education_project.pdf.pdf">Effective pre-school, primary and secondary education project: How pre-school influences children and young people’s attainment and developmental outcomes over time</a>. Department for Education.
	2. Steven Barnett and Clive Belfield. (2006) Early childhood development and social mobility. Future of Children. 16: 2. 
	3. Edward Melhuish and Julian Gardiner. (2020) <a href="https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/867140/SEED_AGE_5_REPORT_FEB.pdf">Study of Early Education and Development: Impact study on early education use and child outcomes up to age five years</a>. Department for Education. 
	4. Burger (2010) How does early childhood care and education affect cognitive development? An international review of the effects of fearly interventions for children from different social backgrounds. <i>Early Childhood Research Quarterly</i>. 25.
	5. Brenda Taggart et al. (2015) <a href="https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/455670/RB455_Effective_pre-school_primary_and_secondary_education_project.pdf.pdf">Effective pre-school, primary and secondary education project: How pre-school influences children and young people’s attainment and developmental outcomes over time</a>. Department for Education.
	6. Meg Callanan et al. (2017) <a href="https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/586242/SEED__Good_Practice_in_Early_Education_-_RR553.pdf">Study of Early Education and Development: Good practice in early education</a>. Department for Education.
	7. Sandra Mathers et al. (2014) Sound Foundations: A review of the research evidence on quality early education and care for children under three. University of Oxford and Sutton Trust.
	8. Sandra Mathers and Rebecca Smees. (2014) <a href="https://www.basw.co.uk/system/files/resources/basw_15323-5_0.pdf">Quality and Inequality: Do three- and four-year-olds in deprived areas experience lower quality early years provision</a> Nuffield Foundation. 
	9. Steward and Waldfoge. (2017) <a href="https://www.lse.ac.uk/business-and-consultancy/consulting/consulting-reports/closing-gaps-early">Closing Gaps Early: The role of early years policy in promoting social mobility in England</a>. The Sutton Trust.
	10. OECD. (2017) Starting Strong 2017: Key OECD indicators on early childhood education and care.
	11. Sarah Cattan et al. (2019) <a href="https://www.ifs.org.uk/publications/14139">The health effects of Sure Start</a>. Institute for Fiscal Studies. 
</Footnotes>
