---
order: 2
parent: Early years
title: Family environment
footnotes:
  [
    {
      id: "footnote-1",
      text: "Waldfogel and Washbrook (2011) Early years policy. Child Development Research, 2011, 1-12.",
    },
    {
      id: "footnote-2",
      text: "Sacker, Kelly, Lacovou, Cable, & Bartley (2013) Breast feeding and intergenerational social mobility: what are the mechanisms? Archives of Disease in Childhood, 98, 666-671.",
    },
    {
      id: "footnote-3",
      text: "Kirstine Hansen. (2010) Children of the 21st century (Volume 2): The first five years. The UK Millennium Cohort Study series. Policy Press.",
    },
    {
      id: "footnote-4",
      text: "Richards, Garratt, Heath, Anderson, & Altintas (2016) The childhood origins of social mobility: socio-economic inequalities and changing opportunities.",
    },
    {
      id: "footnote-5",
      text: "Putnam (2015) Our Kids: The American dream in crisis. New York: Simon & Schuster.",
    },
    {
      id: "footnote-6",
      text: "Stewart and Waldfogel (2017) Closing gaps early: The role of early years policy in promoting social mobility in England. Sutton Trust. ",
    },
  ]
---

<div>
  The family environment affects a child’s early social and cognitive development in a
  number of ways. Parenting, family income, and the kinds of activities done with a child
  all play a part. The quality of the family environment can vary significantly depending
  on socio-economic conditions<FootnoteLink linkId="footnote-3">3</FootnoteLink>.

The way that parents interact with their child has an impact on early social and
cognitive development. Particularly important is how sensitive and responsive
parents are to their young children’s needs.<FootnoteLink
linkId="footnote-1">1</FootnoteLink> This is not only about interaction, but
physical proximity too. The research that supports the relationship between
breast feeding and social mobility, suggests that one of the key mechanisms is
close skin-to-skin contact between parent and baby<FootnoteLink
linkId="footnote-2">2</FootnoteLink>. But this opportunity is not available to
everyone and is itself connected to socio-economic circumstances and health.

</div>

import ResearchImage from "../../components/research/research-image";

This kind of parenting is neatly captured by the idea of ‘Gruffalo
time’<FootnoteLink linkId="4">4</FootnoteLink>, parenting that involves
sustained, interactive, and nurturing practices<FootnoteLink
linkId="footnote-5">5</FootnoteLink>.‘Gruffalo time’ is all about the time taken
to read, talk, teach, and play with children, these kinds of activities have
been shown to be especially important for the development of children’s social
and cognitive skills. Other activities that support cognitive communication
development include library visits, eating together, and visiting museums. All
of these factors contribute to how prepared a child is for school. Yet these
opportunities are not evenly available or accessible to all and interaction with
them is determined by socio-economic background.

The family income affects early social and cognitive development in two main
ways. Firstly, higher levels of income allow families to access and provide the
resources and cultural activities that support cognitive development. Parents’
economic and social capital affects the environment provided for a child.
Secondly, the absence of financial stress can allow a parent to be more present
with their child and more easily focus on their needs and development. This is
where policies that support paid parental leave can be effective in providing
parents with financially secure time with their young children. Both of these
factors contribute to the inequality found in early social and cognitive
development.<FootnoteLink linkId="footnote-6">6</FootnoteLink>

<ResearchImage imageName="family-environment.jpg" />
