---
order: 3
parent: Early years
title: Housing and the neighbourhood
---

import ResearchImage from "../../components/research/research-image";

Housing and people’s surrounding neighbourhood can either mitigate or exacerbate
the impact of poverty on people’s lives.<FootnoteLink text="1"/> It is well
known that the UK has a shortage of suitable housing, and the housing it does
have is unevenly distributed.<FootnoteLink text="2"/> Such inequalities have a
direct impact on how easy certain amenities are to access for those from lower
socio-economic backgrounds: transport, affordable food, healthcare and schools.
Moreover there is a body of evidence that suggests the built environment also
has an impact on children’s early development.<FootnoteLink text="3"/>

<ResearchImage imageName="housing-and-neighbourhood-1.jpg" />

Important dimensions of housing include chronic noise exposure, which can affect
reading acquisition,<FootnoteLink text="4"/> and crowding. The latter is
associated with negative school attainment, reading comprehension and spatial
reasoning.<FootnoteLink text="5"/> Longitudinal studies suggest that the harms
of growing up in a crowded environment can persist into later life and act as an
intergenerational transmission of social inequality.<FootnoteLink text="6"/>
It’s important to note that poor quality housing can also lead to increased
exposure to environmental toxins and hazards which can affect children’s
academic, social and emotional development.<FootnoteLink text="7"/>

Beyond the immediate family home, the quality of the surrounding neighbourhood
(air quality, water quality, traffic density, access to green space and play
space) and the availability of essential services like schools and hospitals
also have an effect on children’s early development. This operates through
direct exposure, but it is also about the availability of key resources, and
this can help to reduce amongst parents.<FootnoteLink text="8"/>

<ResearchImage imageName="housing-and-neighbourhood-2.jpg" />

Research has made direct links between issues of poverty, housing, and
children’s health, well-being and development. Research by the Joseph Rowntree
Foundation has highlighted the mutually constitutive effect that poverty has on
housing circumstances and, in turn, the effect of housing upon
poverty.<FootnoteLink text="9"/> Other research has argued for the need to give
greater priority to housing in the context of understanding child
poverty.<FootnoteLink text="10"/> Housing instability has a particularly strong
effect on children’s development. Frequent moves, household disorganisation, and
income volatility have all been linked to lower physical, emotional and academic
outcomes.<FootnoteLink text="11"/>

<Footnotes>
	1. Tunstall, Bevan, Bradshaw, Croucher, Duffy, Hunter, Jones, Rugg, Wallace, and Wilcox (2013) The links between housing and poverty an evidence review. The Joseph Rowntree Foundation.
	2. Dorling (2011) So you think you know about Britain? London: Constable.
	3. Ferguson, Cassells, MacAllister and Evans (2013) The physical environment and child development: An international review. International Journal of Psychology.
	4. Evans (2006) Child development and the physical environment. Annual review of psychology.
	5. Evans (2006) Child development and the physical environment. Annual review of psychology.
	6. Solari and Mare (2012) Housing and crowding effects on children’s wellbeing. Social science research.
	7. Leventhal and Newman (2010) Housing and child development. Children and Youth Services.
	8. Villanueva, Badland, Kvalsvig, O’Connor, Christian, Woolcock, Giles-Corti, Goldfeld (2016) Can the neighbourhood built environment make a difference in children’s development? Building the research agenda to create evidence for place-based children’s policy. Academic paediatrics.
	9. Tunstall, Bevan, Bradshaw, Croucher, Duffy, Hunter, Jones, Rugg, Wallace, and Wilcox (2013) The links between housing and poverty an evidence review. The Joseph Rowntree Foundation.
	10. Ridge (2002) Childhood poverty and social exclusion: From a child’s perspective. Bristol Policy Press; Ridge (2009) Living with poverty: A review of the literature on children’s and families’ experiences of poverty. Department for Work and pensions report; Ridge (2011) The everyday costs of poverty in childhood: A review of qualitative research exploring the lives and experiences of low-income children in the UK. Children & Society.
	11. Ziol-Guest and McKenna (2013) Early childhood housing instability and school readiness. Child Development; Coley, Lynch, and Kull (2015) Early exposure to environmental chaos and children’s physical and mental health; Garrett-Peters, Mokrova, Vernon-Feagans, Willoughby, Pan (2016) The role of household chaos in understanding relations between early poverty and chilren’s academic achievement. Early Child Research Quarterly.
</Footnotes>
