---
order: 3
parent: Working life
title: Inequality in the labour market
---
import ResearchImage from "../../components/research/research-image";

Part of the challenge of addressing this issue is that employers can only hire
those who apply for the jobs. Differences in application rates can partly be
explained because elite firms recruit predominantly from elite universities,
where the student base is not representative of society at large, but concerns
about ‘fitting in’ also deter qualified applicants from lower socio-economic
backgrounds — leading to a process of self-selecting out of certain
professions. As well as young people missing out on great jobs, it results in
businesses missing out on top talent. 

<ResearchImage imageName="inequality-in-labour-market.jpg" />

Those who do buck the trend and move into the professions do not enjoy the same
salary as colleagues from middle-class backgrounds. Those in elite occupations
whose parents were unemployed or in semi-routine and routine working-class jobs
earn, on average, 16% less than those from higher socio-economic backgrounds,
roughly £7,350 lower annual earnings. This difference is partly explained by
these socially mobile people being employed in smaller firms and working outside
London, but it remains around a £4,300 a year difference even after controlling
for a variety of important factors such as these.<FootnoteLink text="1"/>

This figure varies dramatically by sector. While engineering has negligible
differences in pay regardless of social background, the finance sector has
predicted earnings of £11,200 per year less for those from low-income
backgrounds. These pay differences are larger for those who have seen the
biggest improvement in their own career compared to their parents.<FootnoteLink
text="2"/>

<Footnotes>
	1. Daniel Laurison and Sam Friedman. (2015) <a
	href="https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/politicsandpolicy/introducing-the-class-ceiling/">Introducing
	the Class Ceiling: Social Mobility and Britain’s Elite Occupations</a>, 2015
	2. Ibid.
</Footnotes>
