---
order: 5
parent: Working life
title: Progression, pay and retention
footnotes:
  [
    {
      id: "footnote-1",
      text: "Bridge Group. (2016) Socio-economic diversity in the Fast Stream",
    },
    {
      id: "footnote-2",
      text: "Bridge Group. (2018) Socio-economic background and early career
        progression in the law.",
    },
    {
      id: "footnote-3",
      text: "Bridge Group. (2018) Socio-economic background and early career
        progression in the law.",
    },
    {
      id: "footnote-4",
      text: "Sam Friedman and Daniel Laurison. (2015) Introducing the ‘class’
        ceiling. LSE.",
    },
    {
      id: "footnote-5",
      text:
        "Philip Kirby. Leading people 2016: The educational backgrounds of the
        UK professional elite. The Sutton Trust.",
    },
    {
      id: "footnote-6",
      text:
        "Sam Friedman and Daniel Laurison. (2020) The class ceiling: why it pays
        to be privileged. Policy Press.",
    },
    { id: "footnote-7", text: "McKinsey (2015) Diversity Matters.
        https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/organization/our-insights/why-diversity-matters", destination: "https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/organization/our-insights/why-diversity-matters" },
    {
      id: "footnote-8",
      text:
        "Herring, C. (2009). Does diversity pay?: Race, gender, and the business
        case for diversity. American Sociological Review, 74(2), 208-224.",
    },
    {
      id: "footnote-9",
      text: "Carol Kulik. (2008) Diversity initiative effectiveness: what
        organisations can (and cannot) expect from diversity recruitment,
        diversity training and formal mentoring programs. Cambridge University
        Press.",
    },
    {
      id: "footnote-10",
      text: "https://www.resolutionfoundation.org/publications/the-effects-of-the-coronavirus-crisis-on-workers/",
      destination: "https://www.resolutionfoundation.org/publications/the-effects-of-the-coronavirus-crisis-on-workers/",
    },
  ]
---

import ResearchImage from "../../components/research/research-image";

Despite little support for this position within research, there is a widespread
view within the professional firms that socio-economic diversity is primarily a
pipeline issue.<FootnoteLink text="1"/> In other
words, employers tend to believe that increasing diversity at entry level will
naturally work its way through the organisation and assume that firms are
becoming more socially diverse and meritocratic over time. This belief is
problematic as it overlooks the barriers to progression which are evident within
organisational cultures and structures. It is potentially both the cause and
effect of organisations’ limited engagement with the concept of disparity in
relation to career progression. In fact, both qualitative and quantitative
findings suggest that significant work is required to ensure equal opportunities
for career progression regardless of factors such as background, gender or
ethnicity. It shows that diversity requires active management.

<ResearchImage
  imageName="progression-pay-retention-1.jpg"
  objectPosition="80%"
/>

Activity undertaken by firms to achieve diversity is focused on efforts to
attract candidates from underrepresented groups (by means of apprenticeship
schemes, work experience programmes, and open access days etc.). In contrast,
there is much less work undertaken in relation to retaining talent. This is a
significant omission as recent research indicates that opportunities for career
progression are more available to individuals from a relatively narrow range of
backgrounds.<FootnoteLink text="2"/>

<div>
Pay and progression gaps associated with socio-economic background are the
construct of a range of factors. These include:

- dominant work cultures that have been historically shaped by white affluent
  males and which thereby advantage those from these backgrounds;
- employers’ relatively narrow definitions of ‘talent’ (including a strong
  emphasis placed on extraversion and confidence, sometimes over competence);
  sponsored mobility (supporting people in one’s own image);
- client perceptions and preferences; and the collective and perpetuating
  effects of these dynamics on work allocation and performance management.
  </div>

<ResearchImage imageName="progression-pay-retention-2.jpg" />

<div>

### The class pay gap

Recent research on progression in the legal sector reveals that the performance
of employees from lower socio-economic backgrounds is on average equal to that
of those from higher socio-economic backgrounds, and in some cases performance
is on average higher amongst those from lower socio-economic
backgrounds.<FootnoteLink text="3"/> Yet, it reveals a
‘class ceiling’. Despite the evidence on performance, those from lower
socio-economic backgrounds experience a pay and progression gap. </div>

A recent study borrowed the ‘glass ceiling’ to argue that it is also possible to
identify a ‘class ceiling’ in Britain, which is preventing the upwardly mobile
from enjoying equivalent earnings to those from upper middle-class
backgrounds.<FootnoteLink text="4"/> The analysis
examines data from the 2014 Labour Force Survey (LFS), Britain’s largest
employment survey with a sample of 95,950. Here they analyse respondents in the
63 occupations that make up Class one of the Government’s National Statistics
Socio-Economic Classification (NS-SEC). They then look at the class origins of
those in these occupations, and most importantly how their income varies
according to their class background (using NS-SEC classes 1-8).

The results are striking. They show that those in elite occupations whose
parents were unemployed or in semi-routine and routine working-class jobs (‘the
long-range upwardly mobile’) earn, on average, sixteen percent less than those
from privileged backgrounds. This class-origin pay gap translates to about
£7,350 lower annual earnings. This difference is partly explained by the
upwardly mobile being employed in smaller firms and working outside London, but
it remains substantial (around £4,300 a year) even after controlling for a
variety of important predictors of earnings, such as ethnicity, gender, age,
human capital (educational qualifications, job tenure, and training), hours
worked, firm size, and whether a person works in the public or private sector.

The study also uses the LFS to explore various sub-groups in detail. This
reveals telling variations in the nature of the class pay gap. It shows, for
example, that the pay gap is more consistent and larger among professionals than
among managers, that upwardly mobile women face a ‘double disadvantage’ when
compared to stable men, and that the size of the pay gap is larger for older
generations. Finally, it exposes telling variations between elite occupations.
At one end of the scale, engineering provides a more equitable model, with
negligible differences in pay regardless of social background. In contrast, the
results reveal the arresting scale of disadvantage experienced by the children
of the working classes in accountancy, finance and IT. The socially mobile in
finance, for example, have predicted earnings of £11,200 less per year than
otherwise similar privileged colleagues. This disadvantage also tends to
increase the longer the range of mobility.

<ResearchImage imageName="progression-pay-retention-3.jpg" />

<div>

Analysis has also been undertaken to explore the different outcomes of graduates
by socio-economic background, investigating the prospects of graduates three and
a half years after graduation.<FootnoteLink
text="5"/> Private school graduates in top jobs earn
£4,500 more than their state school counterparts. Their salaries also increase
more quickly than for state school graduates – growing by £3,000 more over the
same three-year period. Only half of this pay difference can be explained by
variables such as type of higher education institution attended or prior
academic achievement.

This suggests that non-academic skills such as style of communication or
assertiveness could play an important role in accessing high-status jobs, and
wider societal factors may also play a role.

</div>

<div>

Graduates from lower socio-economic groups are marginally more likely to remain
in high-status jobs, with 71% still in such employment three and half years
after graduation (compared to 65% for their more privileged peers).

The hidden barriers, or ‘glass ceilings’, preventing women and minority ethnic
groups from getting to the top of elite occupations have been well explored.
However, questions of socio-economic background have been largely absent from
discussions of the glass ceiling. Instead, the main political issue in terms of
class and social mobility has been the problem of ‘fair access’ into Britain’s
high-status occupations. While certainly important, there is a danger of
reducing social mobility to this one-dimensional issue of access. It assumes
that social mobility finishes at the point of occupational entry.

</div>

<ResearchImage imageName="progression-pay-retention-4.jpg" />

<div>

The reality is that even where individuals from lower socio-economic backgrounds
secure admission into elite occupations, they may not necessarily go on to
achieve the same levels of success as those from more privileged backgrounds —
despite no evidence of their relative underperformance.

The class pay gap also exposes the insulating effects of privilege. Wealth
affords opportunities that enable individuals to get ahead in the labour market:
allowing young people to undertake unpaid experiences, take risks to kick-start
their careers, travel and build networks.<FootnoteLink
text="6"/>

</div>

<div>

### Cultures of Exclusion

The Bridge Group has undertaken research to investigate who gets ahead,
conducting interviews with employees in various roles across professional
service organisations. Research participants described those who ‘get ahead’ as
‘driven’ and ‘ambitious’ but also as people who are ‘quite well known’, ‘good at
building relationships’, ‘chatty’, ‘sociable’, ‘likeable’ and good
‘self-promoters’. Apart from working long hours, they are good at managing their
‘personal brand’ and constantly seek to increase their visibility, raise their
profile and put themselves out there to become known within and outside the
firm.

These individuals are portrayed as particularly ‘confident’, ‘charismatic’,
friendly and outgoing. Gaining this visibility is seen as key for progression.
These characteristics primarily advantage those who are the most comfortable at
networking and socialising. Several participants also stressed the business
development dimension of getting ahead and how building client contacts is an
important factor in being considered for partnership, which benefits those who
are well-connected.

</div>

<div>

It is likely that the characteristics outlined above can be mapped to class
status. In particular, confidence is often presented within firms as an
absolute, something individuals either have or that they lack. However,
confidence might be better understood as contextual. Where an individual is
perceived to lack fit with the dominant culture (or is made to feel this way)
they may lose confidence, and this is perhaps more likely for those from lower
socio-economic backgrounds who are outside the dominant culture which has been
established by white, middle-class men.

Based on their own and others' perceptions about ‘fit’, individuals from lower
socio-economic backgrounds may also find that they are sorted, or that they sort
themselves, into particular career tracks within a particular profession. Or,
indeed, choose to opt out of it altogether. In the law sector, some interviewees
from lower socio-economic backgrounds spoke of being drawn in to City law via
sophisticated recruitment techniques promising glamour, prestige and
inclusivity. However, they described a gradual process of disillusionment as
vacation schemes and internships revealed the ‘true’ nature of firm cultures as
exclusive environments.

</div>

<div>

There was also considerable ambivalence amongst most employees interviewed, with
some expressing mixed or contradictory feelings about inclusion and diversity,
and some expressing negative beliefs about its benefits and effects. This is
problematic because it is difficult for organisations to make changes to their
structures and cultures without widespread shared commitment to that change
based on clear evidence of why change is necessary.

Reflecting more broadly now on themes common across sectors, the concept of
‘micro-aggressions’ is a recurrent theme. These can be defined as everyday words
or acts which send denigrating messages to certain groups who are perceived (or
perceive themselves) as ‘different’. They are subtle demeaning
comments/statements which, over time, make individuals feel inferior or
excluded.

</div>

<ResearchImage
  imageName="progression-pay-retention-5.jpg"
  objectPosition="right"
/>

<div>

Members of the dominant culture are often unaware that certain comments or
behaviours may be causing harm as there is no intention to offend. Relatively
insignificant issues can build up to become extremely problematic as constant
small comments gradually erode employees’ confidence, self-belief and sense of
belonging.

These comments could include jokes about an individual’s accent, dress or
mannerisms. Or for example individuals may feel excluded from conversations
amongst their peers about their education or background, including shared
cultural experiences available to more affluent individuals, including foreign
travel and expensive sports such as skiing. There may be some significant
complacency about the effect of such exclusions amongst senior leaders.

</div>

<div>

### Fitting in to get ahead

This emphasis on assimilation also means that those from lower socio-economic
backgrounds believe that they start from a disadvantage and are often unsettled
by an anxiety that they are making errors, albeit often subtle ones, in their
execution of dominant behavioural norms. There is a propensity for those from
diverse backgrounds to manage their difference on behalf of others. This point
is regularly and forcefully made by interviewees from Black and ethnic minority
groups who speak of the difficulty of managing stereotypes and the damaging
effect on their own productivity as they focus on fitting in to White, middle
class environments, rather than getting on.

</div>

<ResearchImage
  imageName="progression-pay-retention-6.jpg"
  objectPosition="80%"
/>

Structural features of organisations also have an important impact on
opportunities for career progression. One important strategy in professional
service firms is for employees to underline constantly how busy they are —
interviewees argue that this narrative can sometimes stand alone as evidence of
suitability for high performance ranking and progression in relation to
performance management, quite apart from actual utilisation rates. The
requirement for visibility is associated by some interviewees with a poor
balance between work and life, and with a macho culture, which contributes
towards fewer opportunities for women and those with caring responsibilities.

There is the potential of vicious and virtuous cycles arising from workload
allocation practices. Career progression often relies on taking up the most
prestigious and high-status work. Access to this work may be contingent on the
preferences of senior leaders, who may in turn choose to work with individuals
most like themselves, favouring some over others.

This has the potential for a doubling of discrimination, with less favoured
candidates being unable to build their portfolio of experiences, and
consequently being less favoured (either formally or informally) for future work
allocation or promotion. If individuals from lower socio-economic backgrounds
find themselves excluded and under-utilised as a result, this may give rise to a
cycle of apparent under-performance. Equally, ‘performance’ may be misrecognised
if talented people are less able — for structural and cultural reasons — to
develop the appropriate narrative in terms of their availability, visibility and
skills.

<ResearchImage imageName="progression-pay-retention-7.jpg" />

<div>

### Informal sponsorships

Early-career employees often progress with the help of informal sponsors, who
act as important advocates. Sponsor relationships emerge organically from
working closely with directors or partners, but bonds tend to be established on
the basis of cultural similarities and connections rather than work performance.
Again, these cultural commonalities often reflect shared socio-economic
backgrounds and consequently reinforce inequality of opportunity.

Research indicates that the barriers to progression, identified above, are
amplified by a tendency towards risk aversion in many firms. With respect to
inclusion and diversity, this is manifest in a tendency to recruit and promote
in favour of the familiar and choosing applicants who are similar to those who
have come before. There is also some uncertainty amongst hiring and line
managers about whether recruiting for diversity will in fact be rewarded (or
whether contributing to homogeneity will have negative consequences).

</div>

Many interviewees identify with diversity issues in relation to their
organisation’s stated objective that all employees should feel able to ‘bring
their whole self to work’. Many employees regard this as an admirable goal, and
to some extent believe that they can live up to it. But they express scepticism
about its relationship to career enhancement. This is especially the case where
individuals feel less able to network, and where they feel that doing so for
instrumental reasons would be inauthentic. Overall, women and employees from
certain minority ethnic groups are more likely to identify with this view.
Furthermore, the interviewees who are most likely to agree that they could bring
their whole self to work are those whose social identity already fits most
closely with the dominant culture: in other words, White (middle-class) men.

Interviewees express divergent views about the use of compliance in relation to
inclusion and diversity and its relative importance in driving change. There is
though relative consensus that there is a continuing lack of accountability
around diversity targets. Interviewees point out that while there is clear
accountability for most other targets and metrics within the business, this is
not evident with respect to inclusion and diversity, in which context targets
can easily be missed, with no consequences for managers. The overwhelming
evidence is that these outcomes require that diversity is effectively managed;
the key point being that the benefits of diversity can only be realised if there
is a corresponding commitment to inclusion.

### The business case paradox

Studies to date that claim to demonstrate a clear relationship between diversity
and business performance tend not to originate within the academic context, but
are instead generated by consultants and advocates using relatively simple
statistical techniques. There has been little or no research seeking to isolate
the relationship between socio-economic diversity and business benefits to date
— though any studies seeking to do so would experience significant limitations
relating to the available data and establishing a robust methodology for
isolating cause and effect.

Following the emergence of the diversity agenda, many studies have attempted to
measure the business case using statistical surveys and associated analysis. The
academic literature has often distinguished between job related or cognitive
diversity, relating to differences in knowledge and experience, and demographic
diversity, which focuses on the composition of the workforce

<FootnoteLink linkId="footnote-6">6</FootnoteLink>. The latter is of most
concern here. With respect to demographics, socio-economic background has been
comparatively over-looked. Instead, the primary focus has been on the share of
women in the organisation, or its ethnic composition overall, with some studies
looking at the specific effect of diversity in leadership positions. Metrics
employed to measure the business case range from ‘soft’ indicators such as
employee commitment, turnover and satisfaction, to ‘hard’ measures of financial
performance including profit or shareholder value. A number of studies have
found a relatively clear positive business case for diversity. For example,
consultancy firm McKinsey found a statistically significant relationship between
a more diverse leadership team and better financial performance, though the
relationship differed depending on the country and industry <FootnoteLink linkId="footnote-7">7</FootnoteLink>. Academic research has also demonstrated
that more diverse groups have the potential to consider a wider range for
perspectives and consequently generate higher quality solutions. For example, a
study by Herring found that diversity is associated with increased sales
revenue, more customers, greater market share and greater relative
profits<FootnoteLink linkId="footnote-8">8</FootnoteLink>. Yet alongside these
positive findings, a range of studies show less positive effects. For example,
workforce diversity has been shown to result in lower employee commitment;
employee dissatisfaction and higher turnover; as well as intergroup conflict and
less integration. And much of the research demonstrating a relatively linear
positive relationship here has been produced by consultancies and some may not
meet the requirements for peer reviewed academic research in terms of
methodological rigour. One way of approaching this uncertainty is to suggest
that diversity has paradoxical effects (Herring, 2009), offering both benefits
and challenges for organisations. Another approach is to point out that
workforce diversity can deliver benefits, but only when it is effectively
managed.<FootnoteLink linkId="footnote-9">9</FootnoteLink>

### Retirement

In all life stages, wealth influences living standards and educational and
employment outcomes. But in retirement, the role of wealth in determining income
and quality of life becomes especially stark.

Income inequality of retired individuals grew sharply in 2019. Rising inequality
among people living in retired households reflects stronger growth for the
richest fifth of people living in retired households, relative to the poorest
fifth, in part caused by increasing income from private pensions.

There is considerable diversity in the transition to retirement in terms of the
age at which it occurs. This may be related to wealth and social class but there
is insufficient evidence, at present, to illuminate the issue. Further research
is required to understand the extent to which retirement is defined and
experienced differentially by social class,ethnicity and gender. There is every
possibility that with a shrinking public sector, and increased emphasis on
private pensions, retirement may become an opportunity only for the wealthy. For
women who have experienced periods of time out of the labour market due to the
responsibilities of parenthood, retirement may be more financially precarious.
The complexities of individuals’ marital histories, alongside their work
histories, need to be taken into account in order to understand their financial
security in later life

### Multiplier effect: COVID-19

Covid-19 has given rise to an economic crisis which is exposing and exacerbating
existing structural inequalities along gender, class and ethnic lines. It is the
lowest paid who have been hit hardest, both in terms of job losses and exposure
to the virus. In contrast, the highest paid are more likely to have the option
to work from home, and they have financial resources to insulate them from the
worst effects of the recession. A recent study found that one-third of
lower-paid employees have lost jobs or been furloughed, compared to less than
one-in-ten top earners<FootnoteLink linkId="footnote-10">10</FootnoteLink>.

The pandemic has not caused inequality, but has exposed existing and
long-standing social, economic and racial inequalities. Individuals from Black
and ethnic minority groups are more likely to be in precarious and low-paid
employment than White individuals. They are disproportionately suffering from
the worst health effects of Covid-19, and they are overrepresented in the
sectors most vulnerable to the economic downturn. For instance, the transport
and storage sector has announced the most redundancies, with 34,000 reported.
Black and minority ethnic workers, who make up 12% of the UK workforce, account
for 18% of jobs in this industry. Bangladeshi men are four times as likely as
White British men to have jobs in shut-down industries. Pakistani men are nearly
three times as likely, partly due to their concentration in taxi driving. Black
African and Black Caribbean men are both 50% more likely than white British men
to be in shut-down sectors.

The pandemic is also deepening existing gender inequalities. Women typically
earn less than men and have greater employment insecurity. But with the closure
of nurseries and schools, women’s employment prospects have diminished further
as they have borne the brunt of caring responsibilities in the home. The burden
of childcare and its impact on working life is especially acute for single
mothers who head up the majority of single parent households (20% of households
with dependent children in comparison to 3% headed by single fathers).

New entrants to the labour market are likely to have an especially difficult
time as a result of the economic effects of Covid-19. Evidence from previous
recessions indicates that graduates will be less likely to find work and more
likely to undertake low-skilled employment. They will earn less than they
anticipated for a considerable period of time until the economy recovers.
Employers anticipate cutting entry-level recruitment this year by 23%:
recruiting 12% less graduates, 32% less apprentices and school leavers, and 40%
less interns and placement students.

The reduction of work experience opportunities will have a significant impact on
young people seeking to enhance their employability and gain a competitive edge
in the labour market.
