---
order: 4
parent: Working life
title: Recruitment practices
footnotes:
  [
    {
      id: "footnote-1",
      text: "Goldthorpe, J. (2001). Mobility, Education and Meritocracy",
    },
    {
      id: "footnote-2",
      text: "Bridge Group. (2019) Access Accountancy.",
      destination: "http://www.accessaccountancy.org/uploads/5/1/8/1/51819363/access_accountancy_2017-18_report_-_publish_final.pdf",
    },
    {
      id: "footnote-3",
      text: "Social Mobility Commission 2018.",
      destination: "",
    },
    {
      id: "footnote-4",
      text:
        " Steven Jones. (2020) Might selective English universities now wean
        themselves off A-levels? Council for the Defence of British
        Universities.",
      destination: "http://cdbu.org.uk/might-selective-english-universities-now-wean-themselves-off-a-levels/",
    },
    {
      id: "footnote-5",
      text: " Institute for Student Employers. (2018) Annual survey.",
      destination: "https://ise.org.uk/page/ISEAnnualSurvey",
    },
    {
      id: "footnote-6",
      text: "Bridge Group. (2016) Socio-economic diversity in the Fast Stream",
      destination: "https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/socio-economic-diversity-in-the-fast-stream-the-bridge-report",
    },
    {
      id: "footnote-7",
      text: "Cappfinity. Case Studies.",
      destination: "https://www.cappfinity.com/case-studies/",
    },
  ]
---

import ResearchImage from "../../components/research/research-image";
import RecruitmentPracticesDiversitySVG from "./svg/working-life-graph-2.svg";
import RecruitmentPracticesMethodsSVG from "./svg/working-life-graph-3.svg";

<div>
  It is still the case that many employers recruit from a very narrow group by
  socio-economic background. This is a construct of attraction (who employers
  appeal to and encourage to apply) and approaches to identifying and selecting
  talent in the recruitment process.

Elite employers tend to recruit from higher education institutions also
designated as elite, typically the Russell Group, within which students from
lower socio-economic backgrounds are under-represented. However, research has
also underlined that in the context of attainment inflation, qualifications
increasingly provide more limited information for employers, causing them to
place greater emphasis on ‘soft skills’ (including personal style, adaptability
and team working) in order to assess potential. These are often implicitly and
explicitly associated with middle class experiences and networks.

</div>

<ResearchImage imageName="recruitment-practices-1.jpg" />

Recent research on the diversity of applicants to the accountancy profession
shows that they are generally unrepresentative of the eligible candidate pool.
Data collated annually by Access Accountancy (an exemplar collaboration between
leading accountancy firms) enables us to better understand and act on challenges
(for example by providing work experience) associated with socio-economic
diversity in recruitment. <FootnoteLink
  linkId="footnote-2">2</FootnoteLink>

We know that within professions there are often occupational areas where there
is greater diversity amongst the applicant pool. For example, amongst
accountancy firms, we typically see greater diversity in tax service lines. It
is generally understood that this is because tax work is more immediately
relatable for students who otherwise do not have direct experience of the
professions, through family or other social networks. Tax is also an occupation
which immediately connects with many students’ experiences during their studies.
In contrast, areas such as advisory are less clearly defined and more opaque to
students who for example have no family history with the discipline.

<ResearchImage imageName="recruitment-practices-2.jpg" />
<div>

### Diversity in applications by service line (Bridge Group 2019)

% Applicants by Parental Degree and Service Line

  <RecruitmentPracticesDiversitySVG/>
</div>
<div>

### The practice of targeting highly selective universities

It has been considered highly rational for competitive employers to focus their
graduate recruitment efforts on the selective universities, in order to secure
efficient access to the best ‘talent’. However, this approach also focuses
efforts amongst the least diverse populations. Those institutions that have the
most visits from leading employers are those with least socio-economic
diversity.<FootnoteLink
  linkId="footnote-3">3</FootnoteLink>

Further, selective universities rely on A-level outcomes that are determined by
many non-academic factors, such as socio-economic background, social capital and
school type. Prior advantage influences performance in assessments. Hence,
students at the most selective universities, on average, have greater access to
social capital, are given more support on their journey to university, have
wider social networks, and more careers support than their peers from lower
socio-economic backgrounds. We can make a reasonable assumption that by
favouring students who had disproportionate access to these advantages, many
employers are missing talented candidates who would perform exceptionally given
the opportunity.

</div>

<div>

Whilst the use of contextual data by universities has been a step in the right
direction, in practice, the benefits of the strategy are ameliorated by the
market system, with league tables rewarding hyper-selectivity and favouring
universities with high tariff entrants<FootnoteLink linkId="4">4</FootnoteLink>.
Little is currently done to measure institutions that offer ‘value added’ to
their students (i.e. outcomes relative to input).

</div>
<div>
### Attracting diverse applicants

There are also recent data to indicate that many leading employers are
disproportionately attracting students from higher socio-economic backgrounds,
even within the least diverse universities.

Attraction is not just about targeting institutions, but about accessing a wide
range of students on these campuses. Studies have demonstrated that employers
should consider collaborating with both Careers Services and academic
departments to develop activities that make a direct contribution to teaching
and learning in specific subject areas. This practice addresses the problem of
student self-selection, i.e. reduces the likelihood of only speaking with those
already aware of a particular employer intending to apply. It also showcases
what is at the heart of the relevant role and responds to universities’ needs
for ‘real-life’ learning within the curriculum.

There is evidence suggesting that social background has an effect on people’s
goals when seeking employment. Individuals from higher socio-economic groups
appear to prioritise drivers such as salary, personal responsibility, status and
prestige, whereas those from lower socio-economic groups attach greater priority
to work-life balance, leadership style, and job security. It is, however,
important not to homogenise groups and overlook the intersections of different
diversity characteristics.

</div>
<div>
### Selection Processes

The way in which employers define talent, and the subsequent way in which this
informs which applicants are selected, is obviously also critical to workforce
diversity and realising the business case for socio-economic diversity.
Candidate screening criteria is a significant factor contributing to the lack of
socio-economic diversity in the professions, and changes in this regard are
outlined in the figure below. Many employers have recently received positive
press for removing the requirement for a specific UCAS tariff; the share of
employers that will accept applicants with any UCAS tariff has risen by 12
percentage points in the last year.

</div>

<div>

#### Methods used by employers to screen candidates applications (ISE 2018) <FootnoteLink id="footnote-5">5</FootnoteLink>

  <RecruitmentPracticesMethodsSVG />
</div>

It has been largely assumed that the consequence of employers reducing, or
removing, aspects of screening criteria (including, in some cases, removing the
need for a degree) will result in greater diversity amongst candidates appointed
to the job. However, unless this more inclusive approach to accepting
candidates’ applications is matched with a critical review of the tools used to
select them, there is a risk that little progress will be made. Some graduate
selection tools, especially those used in mass recruitment (e.g. traditional
online numerical tests) intrinsically disadvantage candidates from lower
socio-economic groups. This effect is stronger in tests that candidates can
practice in advance and is explored in detail later in this section.

<ResearchImage imageName="recruitment-practices-3.jpg" />

<div>
  Amongst some employers, an increased focus on screening criteria has not been
  matched by a sufficient focus on the use of selection tools in the recruitment
  process. Employers might explore greater use of strengths-based assessment
  throughout the selection process, which has been shown to deliver a focus on
  potential over previous experiences. <FootnoteLink id="footnote-6">6</FootnoteLink>

There is much evidence to show that candidates from lower socio-economic groups
have less access to the opportunities and experiences from which to draw
examples throughout the selection process.

</div>

Competency interviews typically include a series of enquiries at the
interviewer’s discretion, which creates opportunities for unconscious bias.
There is a building evidence base to show that the combination of capability and
motivation, tested through this approach, is a strong predictor of future
performance<FootnoteLink id="footnote-7">7</FootnoteLink>. More than 17% of
employers now assess students on their strengths rather than their competencies,
38% use situational judgement tests and 42% of employers check psychometric test
scores against on-the-job performance. This could reshape the way that employers
look for talent, and how they define it.
