---
order: 6
parent: Working life
title: The business case paradox
---

import ResearchImage from "../../components/research/research-image";

Studies to date that claim to demonstrate a clear relationship between diversity
and business performance tend not to originate within the academic context, but
are instead generated by consultants and advocates using relatively simple
statistical techniques. There has been little or no research seeking to isolate
the relationship between socio-economic diversity and business benefits to date
— though any studies seeking to do so would experience significant limitations
relating to the available data and establishing a robust methodology for
isolating cause and effect.

<ResearchImage imageName="business-paradox-1.jpg" />

<div>
Following the emergence of the diversity agenda, many studies have attempted to
measure the business case using statistical surveys and associated analysis. The
academic literature has often distinguished between job related or cognitive
diversity, relating to differences in knowledge and experience, and demographic
diversity, which focuses on the composition of the workforce.<FootnoteLink
text="1"/> The latter is of most concern here.

With respect to demographics, socio-economic background has been comparatively
over-looked. Instead, the primary focus has been on the share of women in the
organisation, or its ethnic composition overall, with some studies looking at
the specific effect of diversity in leadership positions. Metrics employed to
measure the business case range from ‘soft’ indicators such as employee
commitment, turnover and satisfaction, to ‘hard’ measures of financial
performance including profit or shareholder value.
</div>

<div>
A number of studies have found a relatively clear positive business case for
diversity. For example, consultancy firm McKinsey found a statistically
significant relationship between a more diverse leadership team and better
financial performance, though the relationship differed depending on the country
and industry.<FootnoteLink text="2"/>

Academic research has also demonstrated that more diverse groups have the
potential to consider a wider range for perspectives and consequently generate
higher quality solutions. For example, a study by Herring found that diversity
is associated with increased sales revenue, more customers, greater market share
and greater relative profits.<FootnoteLink text="3"/>

Yet alongside these positive findings, a range of studies show less positive
effects. For example, workforce diversity has been shown to result in lower
employee commitment; employee dissatisfaction and higher turnover; as well as
intergroup conflict and less integration.
</div>

<ResearchImage imageName="business-paradox-2.jpg" />

And much of the research demonstrating a relatively linear positive relationship
here has been produced by consultancies and some may not meet the requirements
for peer reviewed academic research in terms of methodological rigour. One way
of approaching this uncertainty is to suggest that diversity has paradoxical
effects (Herring, 2009), offering both benefits and challenges for
organisations. Another approach is to point out that workforce diversity can
deliver benefits, but only when it is effectively managed.<FootnoteLink text="4"/> 

<Footnotes>
	1. Alice Eagly. (2016) <a
	href="https://www.researchgate.net/publication/297721612_When_Passionate_Advocates_Meet_Research_on_Diversity_Does_the_Honest_Broker_Stand_a_Chance">When
	passionate advocates meet research on diversity, does the honest broker stand
	a chance?</a> Journal of Social Issues. 72:1.
	2. McKinsey (2015) Diversity Matters.
	https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/organization/our-insights/why-diversity-matters
	3. Herring, C. (2009). Does diversity pay?: Race, gender, and the business
	case for diversity. <i>American Sociological Review</i>, 74(2), 208-224.
	4. Carol Kulik. (2008) <i>Diversity initiative effectiveness: what
	organisations can (and cannot) expect from diversity recruitment, diversity
	training and formal mentoring programs</i>. Cambridge University Press.
</Footnotes>
