---
order: 1
parent: Further education
title: Life Stage Overview
color: midnight
bgImageName: further-education-bg.jpg
footnotes:
  [
    {
      id: "footnote-1",
      text: "Tom Sperlinger, Josie McLellan and Richard Pettigrew. (2018) Who are universities for? Re-making higher education. Bristol University Press, p. 42.",
      destination: "/",
    },
    {
      id: "footnote-2",
      text: "Social Market Foundation. (2017) Further education is key to social mobility in Brexit Britain.",
      destination: "/",
    },
    {
      id: "footnote-3",
      text: "Bridge Group. (2019) The importance of place: geographical isolation and progression to higher education.",
      destination: "/",
    },
  ]
---

import ResearchImage from "../../components/research/research-image";

There has been a significant decline in adult participation in further education
over the last ten years. Students from lower socio-economic backgrounds are
overrepresented in lower level study and apprenticeships which have a weak
return in the labour market in comparison to higher level qualifications (level
3+). The sector has suffered acutely due to funding cuts. Spending per student
in further education is lower than that received by students in secondary school
and higher education.

<div>
  {/* FIXME missing graph */}

  The adult skills budget was cut by 40% between 2010 and 2016 

  “The increase in university places has taken place alongside a drastic
  reduction in opportunities in further education. The adult skills budget was
  cut by 40% between 2010 and 2016.”<FootnoteLink linkId="footnote-1">1</FootnoteLink>
</div>

Successive governments have invested heavily in graduates — seeing their skills
as vital for economic prosperity — and have largely overlooked the importance of
sub-degree qualifications and vocational routes for social equality. Whilst
there has been a lot of talk amongst policymakers on the need for parity between
vocational and academic pathways, there has been insufficient action. Pathways
to progression beyond level 2 are not clearly mapped and the quality and
availability of provision is patchy, partly a result of diminished funding and
insufficient policy attention. 

Culturally, academic routes are seen to have a higher status than vocational
ones and this can impact self-perceptions amongst learners in further education
and intensify the social divide in post-16 education. Labour market evidence,
however, indicates that high level vocational qualifications hold an equivalent
premium in the labour market to academic qualifications. And, the sector is
effective at reaching large numbers of individuals through its diverse
provision: A-levels, Foundation and Access courses, apprenticeships, work-based
learning, basic skills, and vocational and technical skills (from entry level to
degree level). 

<ResearchImage imageName="further-education-overview.jpg" />

Further education is central to achieving regional economic equality, with
colleges and employers working together to address skills deficiencies and
foster sustainable growth.<FootnoteLink linkId="footnote-2">2</FootnoteLink> In
remote and peripheral communities, further education is the only accessible
option post-16 and therefore it has a critical role in improving life
chances.<FootnoteLink linkId="footnote-3">3</FootnoteLink> Investing in further
education and opportunities to upskill is therefore widely regarded as important
for social mobility. 