---
order: 2
parent: Higher education
title: Access to higher education
---

import AccessToHigherEducationGraphSVG from "./svg/higher-education-graph-2.svg";

import ResearchImage from "../../components/research/research-image";

<div>

There is a strong association between participation in higher education and
social class. While there has been an increase in the number of students from
lower socio-economic backgrounds participating in higher education since 2005,
there are still gaps in participation by socio-economic background but these are
smaller or larger depending on the measures used.

There is a strong relationship between social background and the type of
university attended. The higher education sector is stratified, with students
from lower socio-economic backgrounds significantly less likely to attend highly
selective universities. There are many factors contributing to this, including
student choice, geographical mobility and prior attainment. In view of the
expansion of higher education and its steeply hierarchical structure, for social
equality, it is vital to look beyond participation in higher education
generally, to consider access to highly selective universities because they
confer the greatest premium in the labour market. This focus is known as ‘fair
access’.

</div>

<ResearchImage imageName="access-to-higher-education-1.jpg" />

<div className="full-span wide-graph">
  
  ### Percentage of 15 year old state-funded pupils who entered HE by age 19 by Free School Meal (FSM) status<FootnoteLink text="1"/> 

  <AccessToHigherEducationGraphSVG/>
</div>

Progression to the most highly selective universities varies significantly by
region and social background. For instance, in the North East, only 2% of
students from lower socio-economic backgrounds (as defined by Free School Meal
status) attended a selective university in comparison with 11% of students from
the same social group from Inner London. And the gaps in participation between
social groups are significant. In England, students from higher socio-economic
backgrounds are three times more likely to attend a highly selective university
than their peers who have experienced financial hardship. In some regions, the
gap is even wider, such as in the North East where students from higher social
groups are five times more likely to attend a prestigious university.

The ‘fair access’ debate therefore relates to policy and action to diversify the
intake of the most selective universities given their importance in opening
pathways to elite professions. This has been the focus of charities such as The
Sutton Trust, The Access Project and The Brilliant Club. Outreach activity has
centred on raising students’ ambitions relating to participation in higher
education, helping to inform their choices, raising attainment and creating
progression pathways. Additionally, universities use contextual admissions
processes, taking into account students’ background characteristics and
adjusting their entry requirements accordingly. Evidence indicates that flexible
and contextual approaches to admissions are an effective tool to reduce social
inequality in higher education.<FootnoteLink text="2"/>

<ResearchImage imageName="access-to-higher-education-2.jpg" />

<div>

Geography plays an important part in determining access to higher education in
general and the type of institution attended in particular. In some more remote
parts of the country, there is limited access to higher education or no choice
available. This can also mean that schools in such areas are less likely to
benefit from universities’ widening participation activity.<FootnoteLink
text="3"/> Evidence suggests that the higher costs and added risks involved in
moving away from home make this option less appealing to some young people and
those who are less confident that higher education is right for
them.<FootnoteLink text="4"/> 

With limited access to local higher education in remote places, the most able
students are likely to leave home to attend highly selective institutions in
large urban areas. Whilst this may be positive in terms of ‘fair access’ －
diversifying student communities － it has a negative effect on socio-economic
equality more broadly as it deepens regional inequalities.

</div>

Student mobility is therefore a key dimension of inequality in higher education
choice and experience. In areas where there is access to higher education,
individuals from lower socio-economic backgrounds are more likely to study
locally and commute to attend. Whilst the majority of young people now choose to
stay local for university (55.8%), over three times more students from the
lowest social group commute from home in comparison to those from the highest
social group (44.9% versus 13.1%). There are also striking patterns in
participation according to ethnicity. British Pakistani and Bangladeshi students
are over six times more likely than White students to commute to
study.<FootnoteLink text="5"/> 

The Office for Students is responsible for monitoring the performance of higher
education providers in tackling inequalities in access, participation and
success. 

<Footnotes>
	1. https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/757897/WP2018-MainText.pdf
	2. Vikki Boliver, Stephen Gorard and Nadia Saddiqui. (2019) 
	<a href="https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/13603108.2019.1678076">
	Using contextual data to widen access to higher education</a>. <i>Perspectives:
	Policy and Practice in Higher Education</i>.
	3. Michael Donnelly and Sol Gamsu. (2018) 
	<a href="https://www.suttontrust.com/our-research/home-and-away-student-mobility/">
	Home and away: social, ethnic and spatial inequalities in student mobility</a>. The
	Sutton Trust.
	4. Department for Education. (2017) Understanding the changing gaps in higher
	education participation in different regions of England.
	5. Michael Donnelly and Sol Gamsu. (2018) 
	<a href="https://www.suttontrust.com/our-research/home-and-away-student-mobility/">
	Home and away: social, ethnic and spatial inequalities in student mobility</a>. The
	Sutton Trust.
</Footnotes>
