---
order: 8
parent: Higher education
title: Degree apprenticeships
---

import ResearchImage from "../../components/research/research-image";

Degree apprenticeships are proving a popular choice amongst students and there
has been a rapid rise in the number of universities and employers offering them.
The University Vocational Awards Council has estimated that 10% of degrees
awarded could be linked to an apprenticeship within the next three years. The
government has supported their development as a vehicle for social mobility and
a strategic way to achieve greater parity between academic and technical
education. They are widely promoted as a route into higher education without
acquiring student debt.<FootnoteLink text="1"/>

<ResearchImage imageName="degree-apprenticeships.jpg" />

But while degree apprenticeships have the potential to widen participation in
higher education, improve graduate outcomes, and increase socio-economic
diversity amongst the workforce, there is limited evidence of their impact so
far. This is partly a feature of inadequate monitoring of the background
characteristics of participants. Early studies suggest that they are not being
taken up by the individuals most in need of accessing routes into higher
education and skilled employment and they are disproportionately accessed by
men.<FootnoteLink text="2"/> Research has found that only 13% of degree
apprentices are from the most deprived areas. In contrast, 27% come from higher
socio-economic backgrounds. Significantly, this pattern is reversed in the
social composition of those undertaking the lowest level apprenticeships.

<div>

The picture is getting worse over time. Young apprentices from deprived areas
made up 9% of degree level apprentices in 2016/17, but 6% in 2018/19. In that
same time, the proportion of degree level apprentices older than 25 from the
most advantaged backgrounds has more than doubled, from 5% to 11%. This provides
clear evidence that young apprentices from deprived backgrounds are being
crowded out since the establishment of the apprenticeship levy.<FootnoteLink
text="3"/>

The barriers to accessing degree apprenticeships relate to attainment, geography
and careers advice and guidance. At some selective universities, the entry
requirements are high and the competition is fierce over available places.
Information regarding opportunities is patchy, and new places arise throughout
the year and application processes vary. Cultural attitudes amongst some parents
and gatekeepers may also deter them from promoting degree apprenticeships over
traditional academic routes.

</div>

<Footnotes>
	1. Office for Students. (2019) <a
	href="https://www.officeforstudents.org.uk/news-blog-and-events/press-and-media/make-degree-apprenticeships-a-force-for-social-mobility-says-the-office-for-students/">Make
	degree apprenticeships a force for social mobility</a>.
	2. Social Mobility Commission. (2020) <a
	href="https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/894303/Apprenticeships_and_social_mobility_report.pdf">Apprenticships
	and social mobility: fulfilling potential</a>.
	3. Carl Cullinane and Katherine Doherty. (2020) <a
	href="https://www.suttontrust.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/Degree-Apprenticeships-Levelling-Up.pdf">Degree
	apprenticeships: levelling up? Making degree apprenticeships work for social
	mobility</a>. The Sutton Trust, p. 4.
</Footnotes>
