---
order: 4
parent: Higher education
title: Extra-curricular activities and work experience
footnotes:
  [
    {
      id: "footnote-1",
      text: "Bridge Group. (2017) Social mobility and careers services.",
    },
    {
      id: "footnote-2",
      text: "Ann-Marie Bathmaker, Nicola Ingram and Richard Waller. (2013) Higher education, social class and the mobilisation of capitals: recognising and playing the game. British Journal of Sociology of Education. Volume 34: Issue 5-6, p. 741.",
    },
    {
      id: "footnote-3",
      text: "Ann-Marie Bathmaker, Nicola Ingram and Richard Waller. (2013) Higher education, social class and the mobilisation of capitals: recognising and playing the game. British Journal of Sociology of Education. Volume 34: Issue 5-6.",
    },
    {
      id: "footnote-4",
      text: "UK Commission for Employment and Skills. Employer perspectives survey 2014. See also Universities UK. (2018) Solving future skills challenges.",
    },
    {
      id: "footnote-5",
      text: "Rebecca Montacute. (2018) Internships: unpaid, unadvertised, unfair. The Sutton Trust.",
    },
    {
      id: "footnote-6",
      text: "Social Mobility Commission. (2017) State of the Nation: Social Mobility in Great Britain.",
    },
    {
      id: "footnote-7",
      text: "Ann-Marie Bathmaker. (2013) The Paired Peers Project 3 Year Report.",
    },
    {
      id: "footnote-8",
      text: "Carl Cullinane and Rebecca Montacute. (2018). Pay as you go? Internship pay, quality and access in the graduate jobs market. The Sutton Trust.",
    },
    {
      id: "footnote-9",
      text: "Sam Friedman. (2019) The class ceiling: why it pays to be privileged. Policy Press.",
    },
  ]
---

import ResearchImage from "../../components/research/research-image";
import ExtraCurricularGraphSVG from "./svg/higher-education-graph-3.svg";

Family circumstances continue to play a strong part in determining inequalities
across the higher education sector, from access to success and progression. Once
at university, experience is differentiated by ethnicity and social class.
Because of financial and family factors, students from lower socio-economic
backgrounds and some ethnic groups are less likely to participate in wider
social and cultural experiences on campus and this can intensify inequalities in
outcomes. As indicated in the section <Link className="internal-link"
to="/life-stage-research/higher-education/higher-education-and-social-mobility">
‘Higher education and social mobility’</Link>, following the expansion of the
sector, these ‘additional’ skills and experiences now hold a premium for
recruiters. A degree is no longer ‘enough’ and students are expected to acquire
and mobilise additional skills and experiences to gain a positional advantage.

<ResearchImage imageName="extra-curricular-1.jpg" />

In such a competitive landscape, ‘the rules of the game’ have changed and
students are expected to be aware of them in order to get ahead. But research
has revealed that knowledge of the ‘rules’ varies by social class along with the
propensity to acquire additional employability skills. And this is born out in
university participation data that suggests that careers services and activities
are disproportionately accessed by students from higher socio-economic
backgrounds.<FootnoteLink linkId="footnote-1">1</FootnoteLink>

The game is no longer just about educational advantage based on quality of
degree. The stakes have been raised and the privileged seek ever-increasing ways
of securing their position and coming out on top. This has implications for HE
policy and widening participation strategies, and suggests a need for
universities to address maximising the experience of university and actively
providing opportunities to have ‘more than just a degree’ in order to begin to
address the equity challenges currently facing working-class young
people.<FootnoteLink linkId="footnote-2">2</FootnoteLink>

<ResearchImage imageName="extra-curricular-2.jpg" />

There is evidence to indicate the shaping force of social networks in graduate
outcomes. Students from higher socio-economic backgrounds have access to
information and support (capital) that is unavailable to those from lower
socio-economic backgrounds. This can increase the likelihood of students
choosing the best course and institution for them (reducing the risk of them
dropping out), help them to understand employers’ expectations, and provide
networks to open doors to work experience.<FootnoteLink
linkId="footnote-3">3</FootnoteLink>

<div>

Relevant work experience is rated by two thirds of recruiting employers as being
a critical or significant factor sought in job candidates.<FootnoteLink
linkId="footnote-4">4</FootnoteLink> Amongst large recruiters, around a third of
graduate positions are filled by graduates who have already worked within their
organisations, through internships, placements or vacation work. In some
sectors, over half of those students undertaking internships subsequently secure
a graduate role with the same employer.<FootnoteLink
linkId="footnote-5">5</FootnoteLink>

Yet access to relevant work experience and internships is differential by
background.<FootnoteLink linkId="footnote-6">6</FootnoteLink> The Paired Peers
project provides valuable, longitudinal research into the trajectories of
students through higher education and into the labour market.<FootnoteLink
linkId="footnote-7">7</FootnoteLink>

</div>

It compares students from different social backgrounds attending two different
types of university, the University of Bristol and the University of the West of
England. It highlights the effect of social background on students’ experience
of higher education, particularly with regard to their sense of ‘fit’. The study
found that economic constraints on students from lower socio-economic
backgrounds meant they were under greater pressure to take up casual jobs which,
in turn, impacted negatively on their engagement in extra-curricular activities
and work experience.

<div className="full-span">

  ### Proportion of employers offering internships by <span style={{ color: "var(--cobalt)" }}>size</span>, <span style={{ color: "var(--yellow)" }}>area</span> and <span style={{ color: "var(--copperfield)" }}>sector</span>

  <ExtraCurricularGraphSVG />
</div>

There is also geographical inequality in access to internships and graduate work
experience as the majority of opportunities are in London where the cost of
living is the highest in the UK. Almost half of all employers offer internship
opportunities and almost half of graduates have undertaken one. They are
widespread and clearly perceived as valuable routes to employment, but they are
not readily accessible to all students based on geography, social networks or
financial resources. Of employers who offer internships, 48% offer unpaid
placements.<FootnoteLink linkId="footnote-8">8</FootnoteLink>

Additionally, many are unadvertised and therefore place emphasis on the use of
personal networks, disadvantaging individuals without strong social networks in
professional contexts.<FootnoteLink linkId="footnote-9">9</FootnoteLink> Whilst
recent campaigns to ban unpaid internships and unpaid work experience beyond 4
weeks have gained some traction amongst employers, barriers remain and it is a
key area where change needs to take place to enable more equal graduate
outcomes.
