---
order: 3
parent: Higher education
title: Higher education and social mobility
---

import ResearchImage from "../../components/research/research-image";

University education confers social, cultural and economic benefits on
individuals and provides the gateway to most high-status
professions.<FootnoteLink text="1"/> Consequently, it is often regarded as a
vehicle for social mobility. UK graduates are more likely to be employed than
non-graduates and their long-term prospects remain strong:<FootnoteLink
text="2"/> 74% of new jobs created in the future are expected to be in
occupations with high concentrations of graduates. Labour market projections
estimate 1.5 million more professional and managerial roles in the economy by
2024.<FootnoteLink text="3"/> 

<ResearchImage imageName="higher-education-and-social-mobility.jpg" />

But this social mobility narrative has been called into question over recent
years. There is some evidence that the growth of the graduate labour market has
not kept pace with the expansion of higher education, resulting in greater
competition over jobs. Consequently, this weakens the status of degrees and
places greater pressure on students to enhance their employability in diverse
ways, such as through internships and postgraduate qualifications.<FootnoteLink
text="4"/> In this competition, students from higher socio-economic backgrounds
are at a strategic advantage because they have family resources that can
facilitate career development, such as social networks and financial capital. It
is students from lower socio-economic backgrounds who have been most
‘detrimentally affected by educational expansion or graduate inflation, as they
have no other form of capital to exchange for a (graduate) employment
position’.<FootnoteLink text="5"/> 

Some researchers have suggested that existing policies towards higher education
are likely to increase rather than decrease barriers to equal participation, and
contribute to greater socio-economic inequality.<FootnoteLink text="6"/> The
increased marketisation of the sector has intensified stratification. There is a
striking social divide between universities that recruit mainly local students
from lower socio-economic backgrounds and highly selective universities that
recruit nationally and are composed of students mainly from higher
socio-economic backgrounds.

<Footnotes>
	1. Universities UK. (2015) <a href="https://www.universitiesuk.ac.uk/policy-and-analysis/reports/Documents/2015/why-invest-in-universities.pdf">Why invest in universities</a>.
	2. Office for National Statistics. (2017) <a href="https://www.ons.gov.uk/employmentandlabourmarket/peopleinwork/employmentandemployeetypes/articles/graduatesintheuklabourmarket/2017">Graduates in the UK labour market</a>.
	3. UK Commission for Employment and Skills. <a href="https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/543301/WF_Headline_Presentation_v3.pdf">Working futures 2014-2024</a>.
	4. Michael Tominson. (2008) <a href="https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/01425690701737457?src=recsys&journalCode=cbse20">‘The degree is not enough’: students’ perceptions of the role of higher education credentials for graduate work and employability.</a> <i>British Journal of Sociology of Education</i>. 29: 1.
	5. Ciaran Burke. (2016) <i>Culture, capitals and graduate futures: Degrees of class</i>. Routledge. P. 56.
	6. Roger Brown. (2017) <i>The inequality crisis: the facts and what we can do about it</i>. Policy Press.
</Footnotes>
