---
order: 11
parent: Higher education
title: Impact of Covid-19
---
import ResearchImage from "../../components/research/research-image";

There is a great deal of uncertainty about the impact of school closures and the
cancellation of A-levels on admissions to higher education, but early
indications suggest that students from lower socio-economic backgrounds will be
most acutely affected. Evidence indicates that high-achieving students from
lower socio-economic backgrounds are most likely to be given under-predicted
grades, therefore influencing their choice of university and course and, in
turn, their future employment prospects.<FootnoteLink text="1"/>

<ResearchImage imageName="higher-education-covid-19.jpg" />

<div>
All university and third sector outreach activity in schools and on campuses was
cancelled and delivered virtually. Lack of access to a stable internet
connection, a quiet place to work and an appropriate device emerged for some
young people as barriers to participating. Whilst providers adapted swiftly to
respond to the pandemic to support students through a time of extreme
disruption, it is too early to understand the impact of steps taken. 

Some undergraduate students were also hindered during the 2020 lockdown by their
lack of access to a stable internet connection and a quiet place to work. A
survey by the National Union of Students found that about one-third had
difficulty accessing online learning during lockdown.<FootnoteLink text="2"/>
</div>

<div>
In the same survey, three in five students say that Covid-19 has had some impact
on their income. Students’ traditional reliance on part-time work in the retail,
tourism and hospitality sectors — all badly hit by the impact of Covid-19 — is
likely to account for much of this. Students experiencing financial hardship
without family support will be vulnerable to food and housing insecurity. A
recent survey found that 35% of students reported low levels of food
security.<FootnoteLink text="3"/> 

The effects of the recession arising from Covid-19 are not distributed equally
across the labour market. Graduates entering the labour market in 2020 are
likely to have an especially difficult time. Evidence from previous recessions
indicates that graduates will be less likely to find work and more likely to
undertake low-skilled employment. They will earn less than they anticipated for
a considerable period of time until the economy recovers.<FootnoteLink
text="4"/>
</div>

<Footnotes>
	1. Gill Wyness. (2017) <a
	href="https://www.suttontrust.com/our-research/rules-of-the-game-university-admissions/">Rules
	of the game</a>. The Sutton Trust.
	2. National Union of Students. (2020) <a
	href="https://www.nus.org.uk/en/news/coronavirus-and-students-survey-phase-ii1/?load=5&top=1200">Coronavirus
	and students survey: phase II</a>.
	3. Greta Defeyter et al. (2020) <a
	href="https://healthylivinguk.org/2020/06/11/university-students-facing-food-insecurity-due-to-pandemic/">Food
	insecurity and lived experience of students</a>.
	4. Paul Johnson. (2020) <a href="https://www.ifs.org.uk/publications/14816">A
	bad time to graduate</a>. IFS.
</Footnotes>
