---
order: 10
parent: Higher education
title: Unequal graduate outcomes
footnotes:
  [
    {
      id: "footnote-1",
      text: "Lindsey Macmillan, Claire Tyler and Anna Vignoles. (2013) Who gets the top jobs? The role of family background and networks in recent graduates’ access to high status professions. IOE London.",
    },
    {
      id: "footnote-2",
      text: "Higher Education Funding Council for England. (2016) Differences in employment outcomes, Comparison of 2008-09 and 2010-11 first degree graduates.",
    },
    {
      id: "footnote-3",
      text: "Jack Britton et al. (2016) How English domiciled graduate earnings vary with gender, institution attended, subject and socio-economic background. Institute for Fiscal Studies.",
    },
    {
      id: "footnote-4",
      text: "HESA. (2020) Higher education graduate outcome statistics.",
    },
    {
      id: "footnote-5",
      text: "Simon Marginson. (2019) Limitations of human capital theory. Studies in Higher Education. 44:2, 287-301.",
    },
  ]
---
import ResearchImage from "../../components/research/research-image";
import UnequalGradOutcomesGraphSVG from "./svg/higher-education-graph-5.svg";

Inequalities in access to university are perpetuated in graduate outcomes: even
when we account for institution, subject, and prior attainment, students from
lower socio-economic backgrounds and some minority ethnic groups are less likely
to gain employment in the top professions, and earn less on graduation. This is
likely a construct of a range of factors, including the differential levels of
employment capital gained by students whilst at university (participation in
extra-curricular and work experience, for example), geography, and the marketing
and selection practices of employers.

<ResearchImage imageName="unequal-graduate-outcomes.jpg" />

<div>

Despite performing as well at university, graduates from lower socio-economic
groups are less likely to enter the professions.<FootnoteLink
linkId="footnote-1">1</FootnoteLink> Controlling for a wide range of background
factors, three years after graduation, those from the lowest socio-economic
backgrounds are 11% less likely to be in professional employment than those from
higher social groups.<FootnoteLink linkId="footnote-2">2</FootnoteLink>

According to the Office for Students, five years after leaving university,
students from areas with low participation in higher education (POLAR quintile
1) earned, on average, 19 per cent less than those from areas of high
participation (POLAR quintile 5).

</div>

A study interrogated comprehensively (using tax data) whether students from
lower socio-economic backgrounds who attend similar universities and study the
same subject earn less in the labour market than their peers from higher
socio-economic groups.<FootnoteLink linkId="footnote-3">3</FootnoteLink> Based on
a simple measure of parental income, it found that students from higher income
families have median earnings which are around 25% more than those from lower
income families. Once institution attended and subject chosen was controlled
for, this premium falls to around 10%.

<div className="full-span">

  ### Percentage of graduates in highly skilled jobs by index of deprivation, 2012-13 to 2016-17

  **English indices of deprivation 2015**

  <UnequalGradOutcomesGraphSVG />
</div>

<div>

Data shows that of young people leaving university in 2017/18, 53% of Black
graduates secured full-time employment compared with 62% of White
graduates.<FootnoteLink linkId="footnote-4">4</FootnoteLink> Graduates in Black
and Ethnic Minority groups are more likely to be unemployed one year after
leaving higher education than White graduates. This is a product of inequalities
in higher education but also of processes of racism and exclusion in the labour
market.

For instance, work experience is central to enabling students to progress into
professional roles, but as is revealed in the section <Link className="internal-link"
to="/life-stage-research/higher-education/extra-curricular-activities-and-work-experience">
‘Participation in extra-curricular activities and work experience’</Link>, there
are many barriers to undertaking activities based on financial and cultural
factors.

</div>

The landscape of graduate outcomes is complex and what constitutes as ‘success’
varies between students. Focusing on employment outcomes can have the effect of
compounding socio-economic inequalities by promoting the movement of graduates
to large urban areas to secure high status jobs.<FootnoteLink
linkId="footnote-5">5</FootnoteLink> Researchers and commentators urge the need
for a more nuanced understanding of ‘student success’ that recognises the
‘learning gain’ for the individual and the benefits of participation for wider
society. 